# A. Launching programms

One can run **Python** programms via several approaches:

1. Command Line Interface
   1. Python Interactive Prompt (command line)
      1. Separate commands
      2. Import module
      3. **exec** calls
   2. System command line
      1. Run files
2. From other file
   1. Import module
   2. **exec** calls
3. Icon click
4. Menu options
5. In the IDLE GUI

## 1.0. Venv installation

```shell
python -m venv name_of_venv
```

```shell
source name_of_venv/bin/activate
pip install -r requirements.txt
```



### 1.1. Python interactive prompt

**Note:** you should reopen Termial to reload all renewed files, modules and imports!

Technically the interactive prompt is a module named **\__main__** that prints results and doesn't save its code.

**Open Terminal and launch Python interactive prompt**

```shell
python3
```

Result:

```shell
Python 3.7.6 (default, Dec 30 2019, 19:38:26)
[Clang 11.0.0 (clang-1100.0.33.16)] on darwin
Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
>>>
```

Use **-i** command-line argument to launch file and enter interactive interpreter mode (the >>> prompt)

```shell
python3 -i app.py
```

Result:

```shell
>>>
```

**System path**

If you have not set your system's **PATH** environment variable to include Python's install directory, you may need to replace the word «python» with the full path to the Python executable on your machine.

```shell
/usr/local/bin/python3
```

**Exit Python interactive prompt session**

On Windows: **Ctrl-Z**

On Unix: **Ctrl-D**

Universal Python command:

```shell
>>> exit()
```

**Type commands you want Python to do**

```shell
>>> print('Hello World!')
Hello World!
>>>
```

Because the interactive session automatically prints the results of expressions you type, you don't usually need to say «print» explicitly at the prompt.

```shell
>>> 2*3
6
>>>
```

##### You can assign variables

```shell
>>> v = 2 * 2
>>> v
4
>>> string = 'text'
>>> string
text
```

**You can import libraries into you shell session**

```shell
>>> import os
>>> os.getcwd()
'/Users/Master'
>>>
```

**You can use several commands in one line divided by semicolon (;)**

```shell
>>> e = 3*3; e
12
>>>
```

##### You can even use multiline (compound) commands (press Enter twice in the end of code)

`>>> for i in range(5):
...     e = i*10
...     e
...`

0
10
20
30
40

##### That would be an error

`>>> for x in 'python':`

`...     print(x)`

`.... print('done')`

File "<stdin>", line 3
print('done')
       ^
SyntaxError: invalid syntax

#### 2.1.a. Run script file in Python Interactive Prompt as a module

Create file **my-code** with **.py** extension and put code in it:

print('Hello')

Then run Terminal:

`% python3`

`>>> import my-code`

Hello

Python can import only files with **.py** extension.

If some file has another imports inside, it will be handled too.

It runs code once at the first time you import file.

#### 2.1.b. Run script file in Python Interactive Prompt via EXEC funciton

`>>> exec(open('module.py').read())`

It runs code anew each time you import file

#### 2.2. Run script files in Terminal

Create your first script — file with the name **my-file** (don't need to add an extension to file) with the code below:

`import sys`

`print(sys.platform)`

Open Terminal and navigate into the folder where file with Python script lays and run command:

`% python3 my-file`

It'll show the result of performing the code.

##### Save output into file

`% python3 my-file > output.txt`

File **output.txt** will appear in the folder where **my-file** lays, it'll contain the output text.

##### Or use the full path to the Python Interpreter

`% /usr/bin/python3 my-file`

This path is actual for MacOS.

##### Load input data into script and print into output file

`% python3 my-file < input.txt > output.txt`

#### 2.3. Unix-Style Executable Scripts

Create file with executable shell script, use in the first line «hash bang» or «shebang» characters: **#!**

`#! /usr/bin/python3`

`print("I'm bash script")`

Call this file «brian». Add executable privileges to it:

`% chmod +x brian`

or «chmod 755»

Run this file:

`% ./brian`

I'm bash script

#### 2.3.a. The Unix env Lookup Trick

Avoid hardcoding the path to the shell script

`#! /usr/bin/env python3`

`...script goes here...`

#### 2.4. Click file icons

Doesn't work on MacOS.

Use «input()» in the end of your main file to show the output of your script (actual for Windows, if your script prints text and if you run your code via clicking).

#### 2.5. Using IDLE user interfaces

On Mac OS X you may launch Python in 

#### 2.6. Embedding Calls from C or Java

#include <Python.h>

Py_Initialize();

PyRun_SimpleString("x = 'brave ' + 'sir robin'");

#### 2.7. Launch one Python script from another as a separate process

os.popen

os.system

### Get help

`>>> S = 'dddd'`

`>>> dir(S)`

`>>> help(S.upper)`

`>>> help(dict)`

## PRACTICE

# Jupyter

2. Напечатать различные заголовки в Jupyter Notebook
3. Напечатать формулу Latex
4. Создать папку, зайти в нее и отобразить содержимое
5. Удалить папку
6. То же для Windows